Dependence of local left ventricular wall mechanics on myocardial fiber orientation: a model study.
Bovendeerd PH, Arts T, Huyghe JM, van Campen DH, Reneman RS
Abstract:
The dependence of local left ventricular (LV) mechanics on myocardial muscle fiber orientation was investigated using a finite element model. In the model we have considered anisotropy of the active and passive components of myocardial tissue, dependence of active stress on time, strain and strain rate, activation sequence of the LV wall and aortic afterload. Muscle fiber orientation in the LV wall is quantified by the helix fiber angle, defined as the angle between the muscle fiber direction and the local circumferential direction. In a first simulation, a transmural variation of the helix fiber angle from +60 degrees at the endocardium through 0 degrees in the midwall layers to -60 degrees at the epicardium was assumed. In this simulation, at the equatorial level maximum active muscle fiber stress was found to vary from about 110 kPa in the subendocardial layers through about 30 kPa in the midwall layers to about 40 kPa in the subepicardial layers. Next, in a series of simulations, muscle fiber orientation was iteratively adapted until the spatial distribution of active muscle fiber stress was fairly homogeneous. Using a transmural course of the helix fiber angle of +60 degrees at the endocardium, +15 degrees in the midwall layers and -60 degrees at the epicardium, at the equatorial level maximum active muscle fiber stress varied from 52 kPa to 55 kPa, indicating a remarkable reduction of the stress range. Moreover, the change of muscle fiber strain with time was more similar in different parts of the LV wall than in the first simulation. It is concluded that (1) the distribution of active muscle fiber stress and muscle fiber strain across the LV wall is very sensitive to the transmural distribution of the helix fiber angle and (2) a physiological transmural distribution of the helix fiber angle can be found, at which active muscle fiber stress and muscle fiber strain are distributed approximately homogeneously across the LV wall.