TITLE: Quantification of fingertip force reduction in the forefinger following simulated paralysis of extensor and intrinsic muscles.
AUTHORS: Valero-Cuevas FJ, Towles JD, Hentz VR
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Objective estimates of fingertip force reduction following peripheral nerve injuries would assist clinicians in setting realistic expectations for rehabilitating strength of grasp. We quantified the reduction in fingertip force that can be biomechanically attributed to paralysis of the groups of muscles associated with low radial and ulnar palsies. We mounted 11 fresh cadaveric hands (5 right, 6 left) on a frame, placed their forefingers in a functional posture (neutral abduction, 45 degrees of flexion at the metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints, and 10 degrees at the distal interphalangeal joint) and pinned the distal phalanx to a six-axis dynamometer. We pulled on individual tendons with tensions up to 25% of maximal isometric force of their associated muscle and measured fingertip force and torque output. Based on these measurements, we predicted the optimal combination of tendon tensions that maximized palmar force (analogous to tip pinch force, directed perpendicularly from the midpoint of the distal phalanx, in the plane of finger flexion-extension) for three cases: non-paretic (all muscles of forefinger available), low radial palsy (extrinsic extensor muscles unavailable) and low ulnar palsy (intrinsic muscles unavailable). We then applied these combinations of tension to the cadaveric tendons and measured fingertip output. Measured palmar forces were within 2% and 5 degrees of the predicted magnitude and direction, respectively, suggesting tendon tensions superimpose linearly in spite of the complexity of the extensor mechanism. Maximal palmar forces for ulnar and radial palsies were 43 and 85% of non-paretic magnitude, respectively (p<0.05). Thus, the reduction in tip pinch strength seen clinically in low radial palsy may be partly due to loss of the biomechanical contribution of forefinger extrinsic extensor muscles to palmar force. Fingertip forces in low ulnar palsy were 9 degrees further from the desired palmar direction than the non-paretic or low radial palsy cases (p<0.05).