Dynamics of water molecules in the bacteriorhodopsin trimer in explicit lipid/water environment.
Kandt C, Schlitter J, Gerwert K
Abstract:
Protonated networks of internal water molecules appear to be involved in proton transfer in various integral membrane proteins. High-resolution x-ray studies of protein crystals at low temperature deliver mean positions of most internal waters, but only limited information about fluctuations within such H-bonded networks formed by water and residues. The question arises as to how water molecules behave inside and on the surface of a fluctuating membrane protein under more physiological conditions. Therefore, as an example, long-time molecular dynamics simulations of bacteriorhodopsin were performed with explicit membrane/water environment. Based on a recent x-ray model the bacteriorhodopsin trimer was inserted in a fully solvated 16 x 16 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC)-bilayer patch, resulting in a system of approximately 84,000 atoms. Unrestrained molecular dynamics calculations of 5 ns were performed using the GROMACS package and force field. Mean water densities were computed to describe the anisotropic distribution of internal water molecules. In the whole protein two larger areas of higher water density are identified. They are located between the central proton binding site, the Schiff base, and the extracellular proton release site. Separated by Arg-82 these water clusters could provide a proton release pathway in a Grotthus-like mechanism as indicated by a continuum absorbance change observed during the photocycle by time-resolved Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Residues are identified which are H-bonded to the water clusters and are therefore facilitating proton conduction. Their influence on proton transfer via the H-bonded network as indicated by the continuum absorbance change is predicted. This may explain why several site-directed mutations alter the proton release kinetics without a direct involvement in proton transfer.