TITLE: Virtual Patients and Sensitivity Analysis of the Guyton Model of Blood Pressure Regulation: Towards Individualized Models of Whole-Body Physiology
AUTHORS: Robert Moss, Thibault Grosse, Ivanny Marchant, Nathalie Lassau, François Gueyffier, S. Randall Thomas
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Mathematical models that integrate multi-scale physiological data can offer insight into physiological and pathophysiological function, and may eventually assist in individualized predictive medicine. We present a methodology for performing systematic analyses of multi-parameter interactions in such complex, multi-scale models. Human physiology models are often based on or inspired by Arthur Guyton's whole-body circulatory regulation model. Despite the significance of this model, it has not been the subject of a systematic and comprehensive sensitivity study. Therefore, we use this model as a case study for our methodology. Our analysis of the Guyton model reveals how the multitude of model parameters combine to affect the model dynamics, and how interesting combinations of parameters may be identified. It also includes a “virtual population” from which “virtual individuals” can be chosen, on the basis of exhibiting conditions similar to those of a real-world patient. This lays the groundwork for using the Guyton model for in silico exploration of pathophysiological states and treatment strategies. The results presented here illustrate several potential uses for the entire dataset of sensitivity results and the “virtual individuals” that we have generated, which are included in the supplementary material. More generally, the presented methodology is applicable to modern, more complex multi-scale physiological models.
As our understanding of the human body at all scales increases, the construction of a “Virtual Physiological Human” is becoming more feasible and will be an important step towards individualized diagnosis and treatment. As computational models increase in complexity to reflect this growth in understanding, analysis of these models becomes ever more complex. We present a methodology for systematically analysing the interactions between parameters and outputs of such complicated models, using the Guyton model of circulatory regulation as a case study. This model remains a landmark achievement that contributed to the development of our current understanding of blood pressure control, and we present the first comprehensive sensitivity analysis of this model. Effects of varying each parameter are explored over randomized simulations; our analysis demonstrates how to use these results to infer relationships between model parameters and the predicted physiological behaviour. Understanding these relationships is of the utmost importance for developing an optimal treatment strategy for individual patients. These results provide new insight into the multi-level interactions in the cardiovascular-renal system and will be useful to researchers wishing to use the model in pathophysiological or pharmacological settings. This methodology is applicable to current and future physiological models of arbitrary complexity.
