How can squint change the spacing of ocular dominance columns?
Wolf F, Pawelzik K, Scherf O, Geisel T, Löwel S
Abstract:
The pattern of ocular dominance columns in primary visual cortex of mammals such as cats and macaque monkeys arises during development by the activity-dependent refinement of thalamocortical connections. Manipulating visual experience in kittens by the induction of squint leads to the emergence of ocular dominance columns with a larger size and larger column-to-column spacing than in normally raised animals. The mechanism underlying this phenomenon is presently unknown. Theory suggests that experience cannot influence the spacing of columns if the development proceeds through purely Hebbian mechanisms. Here we study a developmental model in which Hebbian mechanisms are complemented by activity-dependent regulation of the total strength of afferent synapses converging onto a cortical neurone. We show that this model implies an influence of visual experience on the spacing of ocular dominance columns and provides a conceptually simple explanation for the emergence of larger sized columns in squinting animals. Assuming that during development cortical neurones become active in local groups, which we call co-activated cortical domains (CCDs), ocular dominance segregation is controlled by the size of these groups: (1) Size and spacing of ocular dominance columns are proportional to the size sigma of CCDs. (2) There is a critical size sigma* of CCDs such that ocular dominance columns form if sigma<sigma* but do not form spontaneously if sigma>sigma*. This critical size of CCDs is determined by the correlation functions of activity patterns in the two eyes and specifies the influence of experience on ocular dominance segregation. We show that sigma* is larger with squint than with normal visual experience. Since experimental evidence indicates that the size of CCDs decreases during development, ocular dominance columns are predicted to form earlier and with a larger spacing in squinters compared to normal animals.