TITLE: Functional Inference of Complex Anatomical Tendinous Networks at a Macroscopic Scale via Sparse Experimentation
AUTHORS: Anupam Saxena, Hod Lipson, Francisco J. Valero-Cuevas
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
In systems and computational biology, much effort is devoted to functional identification of systems and networks at the molecular-or cellular scale. However, similarly important networks exist at anatomical scales such as the tendon network of human fingers: the complex array of collagen fibers that transmits and distributes muscle forces to finger joints. This network is critical to the versatility of the human hand, and its function has been debated since at least the 16th century. Here, we experimentally infer the structure (both topology and parameter values) of this network through sparse interrogation with force inputs. A population of models representing this structure co-evolves in simulation with a population of informative future force inputs via the predator-prey estimation-exploration algorithm. Model fitness depends on their ability to explain experimental data, while the fitness of future force inputs depends on causing maximal functional discrepancy among current models. We validate our approach by inferring two known synthetic Latex networks, and one anatomical tendon network harvested from a cadaver's middle finger. We find that functionally similar but structurally diverse models can exist within a narrow range of the training set and cross-validation errors. For the Latex networks, models with low training set error [<4%] and resembling the known network have the smallest cross-validation errors [~5%]. The low training set [<4%] and cross validation [<7.2%] errors for models for the cadaveric specimen demonstrate what, to our knowledge, is the first experimental inference of the functional structure of complex anatomical networks. This work expands current bioinformatics inference approaches by demonstrating that sparse, yet informative interrogation of biological specimens holds significant computational advantages in accurate and efficient inference over random testing, or assuming model topology and only inferring parameters values. These findings also hold clues to both our evolutionary history and the development of versatile machines.
In science and medicine alike, one of the critical steps to understand the working of organisms is to identify how a given individual is similar or different from others. Only then can the specific features of an individual be distinguished from the general properties of that species. However, doing enough input-output experiments on a given organism to obtain a reliable description of its function (i.e., a model) can often harm the organism, or require too much time when testing perishable tissues or human subjects. We have met this challenge by demonstrating that our novel algorithm can accelerate the extraction of accurate functional models in complex tissues by continually tailoring each successive experiment to be more informative. We apply this new method to the problem of describing how the tendons of the fingers interact, which has puzzled scientists and clinicians since the time of Da Vinci. This new computational-experimental method now enables fresh research directions in biological and medical research by allowing the experimental extraction of accurate functional models with minimal damage to the organism. For example, it will allow a better understanding of similarities and differences among related species, and the development of personalized medical treatment.
