TITLE: Functional organization of the cortical 17/18 border region in the cat.
AUTHORS: Diao YC, Jia WG, Swindale NV, Cynader MS
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
The representation of the visual field in the 17/18 border region of the cat's visual cortex, and the layout of orientation and ocular dominance columns, were studied by making many closely spaced electrode penetrations into the superficial layers of the flattened dorsal region of the marginal gyrus and recording response properties at each location. The 17/18 border region was defined by measuring the change in the horizontal component of receptive field position within the gyrus: as the position of the recording electrode moved from medial to lateral, the receptive fields moved towards the vertical midline, indicating that the electrode was in area 17; as penetrations were made in increasingly lateral positions, the trend reversed, and receptive field positions moved away from the midline, indicating that the electrode was in area 18. The receptive fields of cells close to the border straddled, or lay within 2 degrees-3 degrees on either side of the vertical midline. In addition, patches of cortex were sometimes encountered in which cells had receptive field centers located up to 7 degrees in the ipsilateral visual field. Experiments in which maps were made in the left and right hemispheres of a single animal showed that these patches had a complementary distribution in the two hemispheres. Cells within the patches behaved as though driven by Y-cell inputs: they usually had large receptive fields and responded to rapidly-moving stimuli. They were broadly tuned for orientation and strongly dominated by the contralateral eye. Fourier spectral analysis of orientation selectivity maps showed that iso-orientation bands had an average spacing of 1.14 +/- 0.1 mm and tended to be elongated in a direction orthogonal to the 17/18 border. Individual bands crossed the border without obvious interruption, although singularities (points of discontinuity in the layout of orientations) were more frequently observed in the border region than in adjacent areas. Two dominant periodicities could be measured in the maps of ocular dominance, one at around 0.8 +/- 0.2 mm and a second at 2.0 +/- 0.3 mm. No constant direction of elongation was noted. These are close to the periods present within areas 17 and 18 respectively.