TITLE: The Role of Exposure History on HIV Acquisition: Insights from Repeated Low-dose Challenge Studies
AUTHORS: Roland R. Regoes
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
To assess the efficacy of HIV vaccine candidates or preventive treatment, many research groups have started to challenge monkeys repeatedly with low doses of the virus. Such challenge data provide a unique opportunity to assess the importance of exposure history for the acquisition of the infection. I developed stochastic models to analyze previously published challenge data. In the mathematical models, I allowed for variation of the animals' susceptibility to infection across challenge repeats, or across animals. In none of the studies I analyzed, I found evidence for an immunizing effect of non-infecting challenges, and in most studies, there is no evidence for variation in the susceptibilities to the challenges across animals. A notable exception was a challenge experiment by Letvin et al. Sci Translat Med (2011) conducted with the strain SIVsmE660. The challenge data of this experiment showed significant susceptibility variation from animal-to-animal, which is consistent with previously established genetic differences between the involved animals. For the studies which did not show significant immunizing effects and susceptibility differences, I conducted a power analysis and could thus exclude a very strong immunization effect for some of the studies. These findings validate the assumption that non-infecting challenges do not immunize an animal — an assumption that is central in the argument that repeated low-dose challenge experiments increase the statistical power of preclinical HIV vaccine trials. They are also relevant for our understanding of the role of exposure history for HIV acquisition and forecasting the epidemiological spread of HIV.
Individuals are exposed to Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) many times before they contract the virus. It is not known what an instance of exposure, which does not result in infection, does to the host. Frequent exposures to the virus are hypothesized to immunize an individual, and result in resistance to infection with HIV. This hypothesis may explain the resistance observed in some individuals despite frequent exposure to the virus. Since it is very difficult to monitor the HIV exposure and infection status of humans, this question is easier to address in animal models. I took data from previously published infection experiments of monkeys with Simian Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV) and analyzed them with newly developed mathematical models. I found that there is no evidence that challenging monkeys with the virus reduces their susceptibility to infection. These findings have important repercussions for the testing of HIV vaccines in monkeys, and also for our understanding of the role of exposure history for the acquisition of HIV.
