TITLE: Disease Prevention versus Data Privacy: Using Landcover Maps to Inform Spatial Epidemic Models
AUTHORS: Michael J. Tildesley, Sadie J. Ryan
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
The availability of epidemiological data in the early stages of an outbreak of an infectious disease is vital for modelers to make accurate predictions regarding the likely spread of disease and preferred intervention strategies. However, in some countries, the necessary demographic data are only available at an aggregate scale. We investigated the ability of models of livestock infectious diseases to predict epidemic spread and obtain optimal control policies in the event of imperfect, aggregated data. Taking a geographic information approach, we used land cover data to predict UK farm locations and investigated the influence of using these synthetic location data sets upon epidemiological predictions in the event of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. When broadly classified land cover data were used to create synthetic farm locations, model predictions deviated significantly from those simulated on true data. However, when more resolved subclass land use data were used, moderate to highly accurate predictions of epidemic size, duration and optimal vaccination and ring culling strategies were obtained. This suggests that a geographic information approach may be useful where individual farm-level data are not available, to allow predictive analyses to be carried out regarding the likely spread of disease. This method can also be used for contingency planning in collaboration with policy makers to determine preferred control strategies in the event of a future outbreak of infectious disease in livestock.
Mathematical models of infectious diseases are increasingly used to inform policy decisions. The advantages of such models are that multiple control options can be rapidly tested and compared, without the risks and costs associated with field experiments. However, for such models to be practically useful tools detailed data (both in terms of populations and epidemiology) are required. In many countries, such as the USA, individual-level demographic information on livestock farms is generally lacking. However, remotely sensed information (such as satellite images and land-use maps) provides the potential to generate these data or produce surrogate populations. In this paper we use land cover data to predict farm locations in the UK and investigate the effect of a precise knowledge of farm locations upon epidemiological predictions in the event of a foot-and-mouth disease epidemic. Our results show that, when highly resolved land cover data are used to predict farm locations, accurate predictions of epidemic sizes, durations and preferred intervention strategies can be obtained. This suggests that land cover data may be used in countries where individual farm-level data are not available, to allow for analyses to be carried out regarding the likely spread of disease in future outbreaks.
