TITLE: Determining Host Metabolic Limitations on Viral Replication via Integrated Modeling and Experimental Perturbation
AUTHORS: Elsa W. Birch, Nicholas A. Ruggero, Markus W. Covert
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Viral replication relies on host metabolic machinery and precursors to produce large numbers of progeny - often very rapidly. A fundamental example is the infection of Escherichia coli by bacteriophage T7. The resource draw imposed by viral replication represents a significant and complex perturbation to the extensive and interconnected network of host metabolic pathways. To better understand this system, we have integrated a set of structured ordinary differential equations quantifying T7 replication and an E. coli flux balance analysis metabolic model. Further, we present here an integrated simulation algorithm enforcing mutual constraint by the models across the entire duration of phage replication. This method enables quantitative dynamic prediction of virion production given only specification of host nutritional environment, and predictions compare favorably to experimental measurements of phage replication in multiple environments. The level of detail of our computational predictions facilitates exploration of the dynamic changes in host metabolic fluxes that result from viral resource consumption, as well as analysis of the limiting processes dictating maximum viral progeny production. For example, although it is commonly assumed that viral infection dynamics are predominantly limited by the amount of protein synthesis machinery in the host, our results suggest that in many cases metabolic limitation is at least as strict. Taken together, these results emphasize the importance of considering viral infections in the context of host metabolism.
Viral infection is a serious problem with relatively few known solutions. Much of the complexity of viral infection is contributed by the host's own resources that the virus commandeers. Viruses lack the machinery and precursors required to replicate, and thus may be considered metabolic products of their host. Our goal is a systems-level understanding of host-viral metabolic interaction via computational tools and quantitative dynamic measurements. Here we present an integrated model of T7 phage viral replication and host E. coli metabolism that predicts phage production changes across media conditions and provides insight into the underlying limiting factors in T7 replication. The model simulations, supported by our experimental measurements, highlight the role of host metabolism in determining the dynamics of viral infection.
