TITLE: The Laminar Cortex Model: A New Continuum Cortex Model Incorporating Laminar Architecture
AUTHORS: Jiaxin Du, Viktor Vegh, David C. Reutens
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Local field potentials (LFPs) are widely used to study the function of local networks in the brain. They are also closely correlated with the blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal, the predominant contrast mechanism in functional magnetic resonance imaging. We developed a new laminar cortex model (LCM) to simulate the amplitude and frequency of LFPs. Our model combines the laminar architecture of the cerebral cortex and multiple continuum models to simulate the collective activity of cortical neurons. The five cortical layers (layer I, II/III, IV, V, and VI) are simulated as separate continuum models between which there are synaptic connections. The LCM was used to simulate the dynamics of the visual cortex under different conditions of visual stimulation. LFPs are reported for two kinds of visual stimulation: general visual stimulation and intermittent light stimulation. The power spectra of LFPs were calculated and compared with existing empirical data. The LCM was able to produce spontaneous LFPs exhibiting frequency-inverse (1/ƒ) power spectrum behaviour. Laminar profiles of current source density showed similarities to experimental data. General stimulation enhanced the oscillation of LFPs corresponding to gamma frequencies. During simulated intermittent light stimulation, the LCM captured the fundamental as well as high order harmonics as previously reported. The power spectrum expected with a reduction in layer IV neurons, often observed with focal cortical dysplasias associated with epilepsy was also simulated.
Local field potentials (LFPs) are low-frequency fluctuations of the electric fields produced by the brain. They have been widely studied to understand brain function and activity. LFPs reflect the activity of neurons within a few square millimeters of the cerebral cortex, an area containing more than 10,000 neurons. To avoid the complexity of simulating such a large number of individual neurons, the continuum cortex model was devised to simulate the collective activity of groups of neurons generating cortical LFPs. However, the continuum cortex model assumes that the cortex is two-dimensional and does not take into account the laminar architecture of the cerebral cortex. We developed a three-dimensional laminar cortex model (LCM) by combining laminar architecture with the continuum cortex model. This expansion enables the LCM to simulate the detailed three-dimensional distribution of the LFP within the cortex. We used the LCM to simulate LFPs within the visual cortex under different conditions of visual stimulation. The LCM reproduced the key features of LFPs observed in electrophysiological experiments. We conclude that the LCM is a potentially useful tool to investigate the underlying mechanism of LFPs.
