TITLE: Minimum Free Energy Path of Ligand-Induced Transition in Adenylate Kinase
AUTHORS: Yasuhiro Matsunaga, Hiroshi Fujisaki, Tohru Terada, Tadaomi Furuta, Kei Moritsugu, Akinori Kidera
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Large-scale conformational changes in proteins involve barrier-crossing transitions on the complex free energy surfaces of high-dimensional space. Such rare events cannot be efficiently captured by conventional molecular dynamics simulations. Here we show that, by combining the on-the-fly string method and the multi-state Bennett acceptance ratio (MBAR) method, the free energy profile of a conformational transition pathway in Escherichia coli adenylate kinase can be characterized in a high-dimensional space. The minimum free energy paths of the conformational transitions in adenylate kinase were explored by the on-the-fly string method in 20-dimensional space spanned by the 20 largest-amplitude principal modes, and the free energy and various kinds of average physical quantities along the pathways were successfully evaluated by the MBAR method. The influence of ligand binding on the pathways was characterized in terms of rigid-body motions of the lid-shaped ATP-binding domain (LID) and the AMP-binding (AMPbd) domains. It was found that the LID domain was able to partially close without the ligand, while the closure of the AMPbd domain required the ligand binding. The transition state ensemble of the ligand bound form was identified as those structures characterized by highly specific binding of the ligand to the AMPbd domain, and was validated by unrestrained MD simulations. It was also found that complete closure of the LID domain required the dehydration of solvents around the P-loop. These findings suggest that the interplay of the two different types of domain motion is an essential feature in the conformational transition of the enzyme.
Conformational transitions of proteins have been postulated to play a central role in various protein functions such as catalysis, allosteric regulation, and signal transduction. Among these, the relation between enzymatic catalysis and dynamics has been particularly well-studied. The target molecule in this study, adenylate kinase from Escherichia coli, exists in an open state which allows binding of its substrates (ATP and AMP), and a closed state in which catalytic reaction occurs. In this molecular simulation study, we have elucidated the atomic details of the conformational transition between the open and the closed states. A combined use of the path search method and the free energy calculation method enabled the transition pathways to be traced in atomic detail on micro- to millisecond time scales. Our simulations revealed that two ligand molecules, AMP and ATP, play a distinctive role in the transition scenario. The specific binding of AMP into the hinge region occurs first and creates a bottleneck in the transition. ATP-binding, which requires the dehydration of an occluded water molecule, is completed at a later stage of the transition.
