The layout of orientation and ocular dominance domains in area 17 of strabismic cats.
Löwel S, Schmidt KE, Kim DS, Wolf F, Hoffsümmer F, Singer W, Bonhoeffer T
Abstract:
In the primary visual cortex of strabismic cats, the elimination of correlated activity between the two eyes enhances the segregation of the geniculocortical afferents into alternating ocular dominance domains. In addition, both tangential intracortical fibres and neuronal synchronization are severely reduced between neurons activated by different eyes. Consequently, ocular dominance columns belonging to different eyes are functionally rather independent. We wondered whether this would also affect the organization of orientation preference maps. To this end, we visualized the functional architecture of area 17 of strabismic cats with both optical imaging based on intrinsic signals and double labelling of orientation and ocular dominance columns with [14C]2-deoxyglucose and [3H]proline. As expected, monocular iso-orientation domains had a patchy appearance and differed for the two eyes, leading to a clear segregation of the ocular dominance domains. Comparison of 'angle maps' revealed that orientation domains exhibit a pinwheel organization as in normally reared cats. Interestingly, the map of orientation preferences did not show any breaks at the borders between ocular dominance columns: iso-orientation domains were continuous across these borders. In addition, iso-orientation contours tended to cross the borders of adjacent ocular dominance columns at right angles. These data suggest that the basic relations between the layout of orientation maps and ocular dominance columns are not disturbed by artificial decorrelation of binocular input. Therefore in cat area 17, the orientation map does not seem to be modified by experience-dependent changes of thalamic input connections. This suggests the possibility that use-dependent rearrangement of geniculocortical afferents into ocular dominance columns is due to Hebbian modifications whereby postsynaptic responsivity is constrained by the scaffold of the orientation map.