A pathway for protons in nitric oxide reductase from Paracoccus denitrificans.
Reimann J, Flock U, Lepp H, Honigmann A, Adelroth P
Abstract:
Nitric oxide reductase (NOR) from P. denitrificans is a membrane-bound protein complex that catalyses the reduction of NO to N(2)O (2NO+2e(-)+2H(+)-->N(2)O+H(2)O) as part of the denitrification process. Even though NO reduction is a highly exergonic reaction, and NOR belongs to the superfamily of O(2)-reducing, proton-pumping heme-copper oxidases (HCuOs), previous measurements have indicated that the reaction catalyzed by NOR is non-electrogenic, i.e. not contributing to the proton electrochemical gradient. Since electrons are provided by donors in the periplasm, this non-electrogenicity implies that the substrate protons are also taken up from the periplasm. Here, using direct measurements in liposome-reconstituted NOR during reduction of both NO and the alternative substrate O(2), we demonstrate that protons are indeed consumed from the 'outside'. First, multiple turnover reduction of O(2) resulted in an increase in pH on the outside of the NOR-vesicles. Second, comparison of electrical potential generation in NOR-liposomes during oxidation of the reduced enzyme by either NO or O(2) shows that the proton transfer signals are very similar for the two substrates proving the usefulness of O(2) as a model substrate for these studies. Last, optical measurements during single-turnover oxidation by O(2) show electron transfer coupled to proton uptake from outside the NOR-liposomes with a tau=15 ms, similar to results obtained for net proton uptake in solubilised NOR [U. Flock, N.J. Watmough, P. Adelroth, Electron/proton coupling in bacterial nitric oxide reductase during reduction of oxygen, Biochemistry 44 (2005) 10711-10719]. NOR must thus contain a proton transfer pathway leading from the periplasmic surface into the active site. Using homology modeling with the structures of HCuOs as templates, we constructed a 3D model of the NorB catalytic subunit from P. denitrificans in order to search for such a pathway. A plausible pathway, consisting of conserved protonatable residues, is suggested.