TITLE: Prosthetic Avian Vocal Organ Controlled by a Freely Behaving Bird Based on a Low Dimensional Model of the Biomechanical Periphery
AUTHORS: Ezequiel M. Arneodo, Yonatan Sanz Perl, Franz Goller, Gabriel B. Mindlin
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Because of the parallels found with human language production and acquisition, birdsong is an ideal animal model to study general mechanisms underlying complex, learned motor behavior. The rich and diverse vocalizations of songbirds emerge as a result of the interaction between a pattern generator in the brain and a highly nontrivial nonlinear periphery. Much of the complexity of this vocal behavior has been understood by studying the physics of the avian vocal organ, particularly the syrinx. A mathematical model describing the complex periphery as a nonlinear dynamical system leads to the conclusion that nontrivial behavior emerges even when the organ is commanded by simple motor instructions: smooth paths in a low dimensional parameter space. An analysis of the model provides insight into which parameters are responsible for generating a rich variety of diverse vocalizations, and what the physiological meaning of these parameters is. By recording the physiological motor instructions elicited by a spontaneously singing muted bird and computing the model on a Digital Signal Processor in real-time, we produce realistic synthetic vocalizations that replace the bird's own auditory feedback. In this way, we build a bio-prosthetic avian vocal organ driven by a freely behaving bird via its physiologically coded motor commands. Since it is based on a low-dimensional nonlinear mathematical model of the peripheral effector, the emulation of the motor behavior requires light computation, in such a way that our bio-prosthetic device can be implemented on a portable platform.
Brain Machine Interfaces (BMIs) decode motor instructions from neuro-physiological recordings and feed them to bio-mimetic effectors. Many applications achieve high accuracy on a limited number of tasks by applying statistical methods to these data to extract features corresponding to certain motor instructions. We built a bio-prosthetic avian vocal organ. The device is based on a low-dimensional mathematical model that accounts for the dynamics of the bird's vocal organ and robustly relates smooth paths in a physiologically meaningful parameter space to complex sequences of vocalizations. The two physiological motor gestures (sub-syringeal pressure and ventral syringeal muscular activity), are reconstructed from the bird's song, and the model is implemented on a portable Digital Signal Processor to produce synthetic birdsong when driven by a freely behaving bird via the sub-syringeal pressure gesture. This exemplifies the plausibility of a type of synthetic interfacing between the brain and a complex behavior. In this type of devices, the understanding of the bio-mechanics of the periphery is key to identifying a low dimensional physiological signal coding the motor instructions, therefore enabling real-time implementation at a low computational cost.
