TITLE: Mesoscopic Model of Actin-Based Propulsion
AUTHORS: Jie Zhu, Alex Mogilner
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Two theoretical models dominate current understanding of actin-based propulsion: microscopic polymerization ratchet model predicts that growing and writhing actin filaments generate forces and movements, while macroscopic elastic propulsion model suggests that deformation and stress of growing actin gel are responsible for the propulsion. We examine both experimentally and computationally the 2D movement of ellipsoidal beads propelled by actin tails and show that neither of the two models can explain the observed bistability of the orientation of the beads. To explain the data, we develop a 2D hybrid mesoscopic model by reconciling these two models such that individual actin filaments undergoing nucleation, elongation, attachment, detachment and capping are embedded into the boundary of a node-spring viscoelastic network representing the macroscopic actin gel. Stochastic simulations of this ‘in silico’ actin network show that the combined effects of the macroscopic elastic deformation and microscopic ratchets can explain the observed bistable orientation of the actin-propelled ellipsoidal beads. To test the theory further, we analyze observed distribution of the curvatures of the trajectories and show that the hybrid model's predictions fit the data. Finally, we demonstrate that the model can explain both concave-up and concave-down force-velocity relations for growing actin networks depending on the characteristic time scale and network recoil. To summarize, we propose that both microscopic polymerization ratchets and macroscopic stresses of the deformable actin network are responsible for the force and movement generation.
There are two major ideas about how actin networks generate force against an obstacle: one is that the force comes directly from the elongation and bending of individual actin filaments against the surface of the obstacle; the other is that a growing actin gel can build up stress around the obstacle to squeeze it forward. Neither of the two models can explain why actin-propelled ellipsoidal beads move with equal bias toward long- and short-axes. We propose a hybrid model by combining those two ideas so that individual actin filaments are embedded into the boundary of a deformable actin gel. Simulations of this model show that the combined effects of pushing from individual filaments and squeezing from the actin network explain the observed bi-orientation of ellipsoidal beads as well as the curvature of trajectories of spherical beads and the force-velocity relation of actin networks.
