TITLE: Stochastic Modeling of Expression Kinetics Identifies Messenger Half-Lives and Reveals Sequential Waves of Co-ordinated Transcription and Decay
AUTHORS: Filippo Cacace, Paola Paci, Valerio Cusimano, Alfredo Germani, Lorenzo Farina
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
The transcriptome in a cell is finely regulated by a large number of molecular mechanisms able to control the balance between mRNA production and degradation. Recent experimental findings have evidenced that fine and specific regulation of degradation is needed for proper orchestration of a global cell response to environmental conditions. We developed a computational technique based on stochastic modeling, to infer condition-specific individual mRNA half-lives directly from gene expression time-courses. Predictions from our method were validated by experimentally measured mRNA decay rates during the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle of Plasmodium falciparum. We then applied our methodology to publicly available data on the reproductive and metabolic cycle of budding yeast. Strikingly, our analysis revealed, in all cases, the presence of periodic changes in decay rates of sequentially induced genes and co-ordination strategies between transcription and degradation, thus suggesting a general principle for the proper coordination of transcription and degradation machinery in response to internal and/or external stimuli.
The amount of a given transcript in a cell is determined by a fine tuned balance of production and degradation in a complex regulatory network. Regulation of transcription controls when transcription occurs and how much mRNA is created, whereas regulation of degradation controls the rate at which messengers are destroyed. The latter mechanism has recently gained attention due to the increasing evidence of its key role in the overall co-ordination of gene expression. A long lifetime of mRNA enables a cell to produce more proteins from that mRNA. By contrast, a short lifetime rapidly alters protein levels in response to changing needs. Measuring mRNA stability is a complex and expensive experiment and, given the condition-specific response of the degradation pathway, it would be desirable to take advantage of the large variety of expression experiments stored in public databases. To this end, we developed a stochastic model to infer each specific mRNA lifetime from gene expression data. Predictions were validated using malaria data. We then applied our methodology to the reproductive and metabolic cycle of budding yeast and found, in all cases, the presence of a general principle for the proper coordination of transcription and degradation machinery.
