Renomedullary and intestinal hyaluronan content during body water excess: a study in rats and gerbils.
Göransson V, Johnsson C, Nylander O, Hansell P
Abstract:
Our previous studies in rats have suggested a role for renomedullary hyaluronan (HA) in water homeostasis. The gerbil is known for its unique ability to conserve water. In the present study renal papillary and intestinal HA were compared between groups of anaesthetized gerbils and rats before and after up to 6 h of I.V. water loading. Baseline papillary HA in gerbils was only 37 % of that in the rat. Water loading in rats increased the papillary HA content. Elevation was maximal (+27 %, P < 0.05) after 2 h of water loading and then declined to control levels after 6 h of water loading (+3 %, n.s.). In contrast, the gerbil responded with a decreased papillary HA content during water loading. The depression was maximal after 2 h (-49 %, P < 0.05) and was still 41 % below the control values after 6 h (P < 0.05). The urine flow rate increased rapidly in the rat and its maximum, 21 times above the control level (P < 0.05), occurred at the HA peak, i.e. after 2 h of water loading while in the gerbil, the urine flow rate increased slowly and slightly and was only six times above control values after 6 h of water loading (P < 0.05). The HA content along the intestine was similar in the two species: lowest in the duodenum and jejunum and highest in the distal colon. To conclude, in the rat, the elevation of papillary interstitial HA during acute water loading would counteract water reabsorption by changing the physico-chemical characteristics of the interstitial matrix favouring rapid water diuresis. This would work as a complement to the powerful regulation by ADH. The gerbil has a diametrically different regulation of papillary HA turnover during water loading. The decreased papillary HA level during water loading and the slow and small diuretic response may represent a genetic difference in adaptation to enhance the ability to conserve water in an arid environment.