TITLE: Interplay between the Localization and Kinetics of Phosphorylation in Flagellar Pole Development of the Bacterium Caulobacter crescentus
AUTHORS: Carolina Tropini, Kerwyn Casey Huang
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Bacterial cells maintain sophisticated levels of intracellular organization that allow for signal amplification, response to stimuli, cell division, and many other critical processes. The mechanisms underlying localization and their contribution to fitness have been difficult to uncover, due to the often challenging task of creating mutants with systematically perturbed localization but normal enzymatic activity, and the lack of quantitative models through which to interpret subtle phenotypic changes. Focusing on the model bacterium Caulobacter crescentus, which generates two different types of daughter cells from an underlying asymmetric distribution of protein phosphorylation, we use mathematical modeling to investigate the contribution of the localization of histidine kinases to the establishment of cellular asymmetry and subsequent developmental outcomes. We use existing mutant phenotypes and fluorescence data to parameterize a reaction-diffusion model of the kinases PleC and DivJ and their cognate response regulator DivK. We then present a systematic computational analysis of the effects of changes in protein localization and abundance to determine whether PleC localization is required for correct developmental timing in Caulobacter. Our model predicts the developmental phenotypes of several localization mutants, and suggests that a novel strain with co-localization of PleC and DivJ could provide quantitative insight into the signaling threshold required for flagellar pole development. Our analysis indicates that normal development can be maintained through a wide range of localization phenotypes, and that developmental defects due to changes in PleC localization can be rescued by increased PleC expression. We also show that the system is remarkably robust to perturbation of the kinetic parameters, and while the localization of either PleC or DivJ is required for asymmetric development, the delocalization of one of these two components does not prevent flagellar pole development. We further find that allosteric regulation of PleC observed in vitro does not affect the predicted in vivo developmental phenotypes. Taken together, our model suggests that cells can tolerate perturbations to localization phenotypes, whose evolutionary origins may be connected with reducing protein expression or with decoupling pre- and post-division phenotypes.
The development of multicellularity requires specialization and differentiation of individual cells. The process of differentiation requires the breaking of cellular symmetry, which can be achieved via asymmetric localization of proteins; cell division then gives rise to cells with different compositions and hence potentially different fates. However, little is known regarding the classes of changes in protein localization a cell can tolerate without disrupting development. Caulobacter crescentus is a model bacterium that, following cell division, gives rise to two differentiated daughter cells, only one of which is flagellated and motile. This process is regulated by two proteins, PleC and DivJ, located at opposite ends of the mother cell. Using computational modeling, we investigate the robustness of flagellar pole development to protein localization changes. Our analysis suggests that the development of C. crescentus is robust to a wide range of localization changes of PleC and DivJ. Furthermore, certain mutant localization patterns that would disrupt development can nevertheless support it when the mislocalized protein is present at higher abundance relative to wild-type. Our analysis highlights informative localization mutants that can be used to further deconstruct the requirements for C. crescentus development, and addresses the general requirements for protein localization in developmental processes and for engineering differentiation in biological systems.
