TITLE: Modeling Dynamic Regulatory Processes in Stroke
AUTHORS: Jason E. McDermott, Kenneth Jarman, Ronald Taylor, Mary Lancaster, Harish Shankaran, Keri B. Vartanian, Susan L. Stevens, Mary P. Stenzel-Poore, Antonio Sanfilippo
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
The ability to examine the behavior of biological systems in silico has the potential to greatly accelerate the pace of discovery in diseases, such as stroke, where in vivo analysis is time intensive and costly. In this paper we describe an approach for in silico examination of responses of the blood transcriptome to neuroprotective agents and subsequent stroke through the development of dynamic models of the regulatory processes observed in the experimental gene expression data. First, we identified functional gene clusters from these data. Next, we derived ordinary differential equations (ODEs) from the data relating these functional clusters to each other in terms of their regulatory influence on one another. Dynamic models were developed by coupling these ODEs into a model that simulates the expression of regulated functional clusters. By changing the magnitude of gene expression in the initial input state it was possible to assess the behavior of the networks through time under varying conditions since the dynamic model only requires an initial starting state, and does not require measurement of regulatory influences at each time point in order to make accurate predictions. We discuss the implications of our models on neuroprotection in stroke, explore the limitations of the approach, and report that an optimized dynamic model can provide accurate predictions of overall system behavior under several different neuroprotective paradigms.
Computational modeling aims to use mathematical and algorithmic principles to link components of biological systems to predict system behavior. In the past such models have described a small set of carefully studied molecular interactions (proteins in signal transduction pathways) or larger abstract components (cell types or functional processes in the immune system). In this study we use data from global transcriptional analysis of the processes of neuroprotection in a mouse model of stroke to generate functional modules, groups of genes that coherently act to accomplish functions. We then derive equations relating the expression of these modules to one another, treating these individual equations as a closed system, and demonstrate that the model can be used to simulate the gene expression of the system over time. Our work is novel in describing the use of global transcriptomic data to develop dynamic models of expression in an animal model. We believe that the models developed will aid in understanding the complex dynamics of neuroprotection and provide ways to predict outcomes in terms of neuroprotection or injury. This approach will be broadly applicable to other problems and provides an approach to building dynamic models from the bottom up.
