TITLE: Structural Insights into the Inhibition of Actin-Capping Protein by Interactions with Phosphatidic Acid and Phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-Bisphosphate
AUTHORS: Roman Pleskot, Přemysl Pejchar, Viktor Žárský, Christopher J. Staiger, Martin Potocký
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
The actin cytoskeleton is a dynamic structure that coordinates numerous fundamental processes in eukaryotic cells. Dozens of actin-binding proteins are known to be involved in the regulation of actin filament organization or turnover and many of these are stimulus-response regulators of phospholipid signaling. One of these proteins is the heterodimeric actin-capping protein (CP) which binds the barbed end of actin filaments with high affinity and inhibits both addition and loss of actin monomers at this end. The ability of CP to bind filaments is regulated by signaling phospholipids, which inhibit the activity of CP; however, the exact mechanism of this regulation and the residues on CP responsible for lipid interactions is not fully resolved. Here, we focus on the interaction of CP with two signaling phospholipids, phosphatidic acid (PA) and phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2). Using different methods of computational biology such as homology modeling, molecular docking and coarse-grained molecular dynamics, we uncovered specific modes of high affinity interaction between membranes containing PA/phosphatidylcholine (PC) and plant CP, as well as between PIP2/PC and animal CP. In particular, we identified differences in the binding of membrane lipids by animal and plant CP, explaining previously published experimental results. Furthermore, we pinpoint the critical importance of the C-terminal part of plant CPα subunit for CP–membrane interactions. We prepared a GST-fusion protein for the C-terminal domain of plant α subunit and verified this hypothesis with lipid-binding assays in vitro.
The actin cytoskeleton is a prominent feature of eukaryotes and plays a central role in many essential aspects of their lives. This highly malleable structure responds to a wide range of stimuli with rapid changes in organization or dynamics. These responses are thought to be mediated by dozens of actin-binding proteins, the biochemical activities of which have been demonstrated to be tightly controlled by other proteins and/or signal transduction mediators. In this study, we investigated the structural aspects of inhibition of actin-capping protein (CP) by phosphatidic acid (PA) and phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2). We employed diverse computational methods in combination with experimental approaches to reveal mechanistic details of the direct interaction of CP with the phospholipid membrane containing either PA or PIP2. Importantly, we found several differences between PA/PIP2–CP interactions from two distinct species, Arabidopsis and chicken, that enable us to explain and expand upon previously published results. Our new data shed light on the nature of interactions between peripheral membrane proteins and PA-containing lipid bilayers. In addition to a description of the phospholipid-mediated regulation of CP activity, our work also significantly contributes to the ongoing debate on structural details of protein interactions with phospholipids.
