TITLE: The Dynamics of Naturally Acquired Immunity to Plasmodium falciparum Infection
AUTHORS: Mykola Pinkevych, Janka Petravic, Kiprotich Chelimo, James W. Kazura, Ann M. Moormann, Miles P. Davenport
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Severe malaria occurs predominantly in young children and immunity to clinical disease is associated with cumulative exposure in holoendemic settings. The relative contribution of immunity against various stages of the parasite life cycle that results in controlling infection and limiting disease is not well understood. Here we analyse the dynamics of Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection after treatment in a cohort of 197 healthy study participants of different ages in order to model naturally acquired immunity. We find that both delayed time-to-infection and reductions in asymptomatic parasitaemias in older age groups can be explained by immunity that reduces the growth of blood stage as opposed to liver stage parasites. We found that this mechanism would require at least two components – a rapidly acting strain-specific component, as well as a slowly acquired cross-reactive or general immunity to all strains. Analysis and modelling of malaria infection dynamics and naturally acquired immunity with age provides important insights into what mechanisms of immune control may be harnessed by malaria vaccine strategists.
Human malaria infections resulting in serious complications and death occur predominantly in young children, and resistance is gradually acquired with repeated exposure. Malaria parasites have two major stages within the human host during its life cycle: an initial liver stage, and the subsequent blood stage, where parasites replicate in and destroy red blood cells. The mechanisms of acquired resistance to severe malaria may involve immunity to both the liver and blood stage parasites. However the relative contribution of each type of immunity is not yet understood. To gain novel insight, we have analysed data from a malaria exposed cohort from western Kenya. We used mathematical modeling to understand what form of immunity is consistent with the observed rates of reinfection in adults and children seen in the field study data. We found that the reinfection pattern can be completely explained by blood stage immunity. Moreover, the blood stage immunity must consist of rapidly-induced strain-specific immunity that clears individual infections, and general immunity that accumulates slowly and decreases the average parasite growth rate with age. Understanding the dynamics of naturally acquired immunity and infection provides important insights for effective vaccine development.
