TITLE: Weakly Circadian Cells Improve Resynchrony
AUTHORS: Alexis B. Webb, Stephanie R. Taylor, Kurt A. Thoroughman, Francis J. Doyle, Erik D. Herzog
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
The mammalian suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) contain thousands of neurons capable of generating near 24-h rhythms. When isolated from their network, SCN neurons exhibit a range of oscillatory phenotypes: sustained or damping oscillations, or arrhythmic patterns. The implications of this variability are unknown. Experimentally, we found that cells within SCN explants recover from pharmacologically-induced desynchrony by re-establishing rhythmicity and synchrony in waves, independent of their intrinsic circadian period We therefore hypothesized that a cell's location within the network may also critically determine its resynchronization. To test this, we employed a deterministic, mechanistic model of circadian oscillators where we could independently control cell-intrinsic and network-connectivity parameters. We found that small changes in key parameters produced the full range of oscillatory phenotypes seen in biological cells, including similar distributions of period, amplitude and ability to cycle. The model also predicted that weaker oscillators could adjust their phase more readily than stronger oscillators. Using these model cells we explored potential biological consequences of their number and placement within the network. We found that the population synchronized to a higher degree when weak oscillators were at highly connected nodes within the network. A mathematically independent phase-amplitude model reproduced these findings. Thus, small differences in cell-intrinsic parameters contribute to large changes in the oscillatory ability of a cell, but the location of weak oscillators within the network also critically shapes the degree of synchronization for the population.
Circadian rhythms are daily, near 24-h oscillations in biological processes that nearly all organisms on Earth experience. Single cells contain a molecular clock that drives circadian rhythms in physiology and, when many cells synchronize in a population, daily behaviors. We hypothesized that small differences in intrinsic cellular properties allow for a diversity of circadian periods and amplitudes across cells. We observed circadian cells and their synchrony before, during, and after limiting communication between cells and then compared their intrinsic properties to their resynchronization behavior. We found that arrhythmic, weakly oscillating, and self-sustained circadian cells rejoined the rhythmic population independent of their cell-intrinsic oscillations. Using a mechanistic computational model of circadian cells, we found that resynchronization could be enhanced by including more weak oscillators or by placing weak oscillators at more connected nodes in the network. We conclude that intrinsic properties (e.g. oscillator weakness and responsiveness) and network structure (e.g. positions of weak oscillators) can independently buffer tissue rhythms from perturbations. This reveals how cellular and network properties impose rules on systems of circadian cells that must achieve synchrony from a desynchronized state, for example during perinatal development or when forced to overcome societal constraints on sleep-wake behavior, such as working early or late shifts.
