TITLE: Transverse shear along myocardial cleavage planes provides a mechanism for normal systolic wall thickening.
AUTHORS: LeGrice IJ, Takayama Y, Covell JW
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
Recent studies in humans and other species show that there is substantial transverse shear strain in the left ventricular myocardium, and others have shown transverse myocardial laminae separated by cleavage planes. We proposed that cellular rearrangement based on shearing along myocardial cleavage planes could account for > 50% of normal systolic wall thickening, since < 50% can be explained by increases in myocyte diameter. To test this hypothesis, we measured strains at two sites with different cleavage-plane anatomy in eight open-chest dogs. Columns of radiopaque markers were implanted in the left ventricular anterior free wall and septum. Markers were tracked with biplane cineradiography, and strains were quantified by using finite deformation techniques. Hearts were perfusion-fixed with glutaraldehyde, and cleavage-plane orientations at the bead sites were measured in three orthogonal planes. At subendocardial sites of the anterior left ventricular wall, where the cleavage planes approach the endocardium obliquely from the apical side of the surface normal in the longitudinal-radial plane (-67 +/- 11 degrees), systolic longitudinal-radial transverse shear (E23) was positive (0.14 +/- 0.08). At the septal sites where the subendocardial cleavage planes approach the endocardium obliquely from above the surface normal (44 +/- 12 degrees), E23 was negative (-0.12 +/- 0.08). The differences in cleavage-plane angle and E23 at the two sites were each highly significant (P < .0005). At both sites, the transverse shear strain accompanied substantial systolic wall thickening at the subendocardium (anterior, E33 = 0.44 +/- 0.16; septum, E33 = 0.22 +/- 0.14). These data are not representative of the behavior in midwall and outer wall sites, where cleavage-plane orientation was not consistently different between anterior left ventricle and septum. Our data indicate that rearrangement of myocytes by slippage along myocardial cleavage planes is in the correct direction and of sufficient magnitude in the subendocardium (inner third) to account for a substantial proportion (> 50%) of systolic wall thickening. Furthermore, three-dimensional reconstruction of the myocardial laminae and local comparison with maximum strain vectors indicate that for the inner third of the ventricular wall the maximum shear deformation is a result of relative sliding between myocardial laminae.