TITLE: Multiple Spike Time Patterns Occur at Bifurcation Points of Membrane Potential Dynamics
AUTHORS: J. Vincent Toups, Jean-Marc Fellous, Peter J. Thomas, Terrence J. Sejnowski, Paul H. Tiesinga
TERMS:
CATEGORIES:
ABSTRACT:
The response of a neuron to repeated somatic fluctuating current injections in vitro can elicit a reliable and precisely timed sequence of action potentials. The set of responses obtained across trials can also be interpreted as the response of an ensemble of similar neurons receiving the same input, with the precise spike times representing synchronous volleys that would be effective in driving postsynaptic neurons. To study the reproducibility of the output spike times for different conditions that might occur in vivo, we somatically injected aperiodic current waveforms into cortical neurons in vitro and systematically varied the amplitude and DC offset of the fluctuations. As the amplitude of the fluctuations was increased, reliability increased and the spike times remained stable over a wide range of values. However, at specific values called bifurcation points, large shifts in the spike times were obtained in response to small changes in the stimulus, resulting in multiple spike patterns that were revealed using an unsupervised classification method. Increasing the DC offset, which mimicked an overall increase in network background activity, also revealed bifurcation points and increased the reliability. Furthermore, the spike times shifted earlier with increasing offset. Although the reliability was reduced at bifurcation points, a theoretical analysis showed that the information about the stimulus time course was increased because each of the spike time patterns contained different information about the input.
Neurons respond with precise spike times to fluctuating current injections, leading to peaks in ensemble firing rate. The structure of these peaks, or spike events, provides a compact description of the neural response. We explore the consequences of precise spike times for neural coding in vivo, by investigating the spike event structure of virtual cell assemblies constructed in vitro. We incorporate diversity of electrophysiological response properties by varying the amplitude and offset of a common stimulus waveform injected in vitro. Across multiple trials, spike trains produce precise events in response to upswings in the stimulus, suggesting that such upswings in in vivo assemblies may effectively drive postsynaptic targets and transmit information about the stimulus. In simulations and in vitro, we identified bifurcations in the event structure as the amplitude or the offset was varied. Near bifurcation points, the neural response showed heightened sensitivity to intrinsic neural noise, leading to multiple competing response patterns, and enriching the representation of stimulus features by the ensemble output. The presence of bifurcations could therefore allow an ideal observer to extract more information about the stimulus. Our results suggest that event structure bifurcations may provide a mechanism for boosting information transmission in vivo.
