CNS inputs to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the rat.
Krout KE, Kawano J, Mettenleiter TC, Loewy AD
Abstract:
The neural circuits that modulate the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the rat were studied with the retrograde transneuronal tracer--pseudorabies virus. First-order afferents were also identified using cholera toxin beta subunit. Olfactory processing regions (viz., main olfactory bulb, anterior olfactory nucleus, taenia tecta, endopiriform nucleus, medial amygdaloid nucleus, piriform cortex, and posteriomedial cortical amygdaloid nucleus) were virally labeled. The subfornical organ directly innervates SCN; two other circumventricular organs: organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis and area postrema provide multisynaptic inputs. Direct limbic afferents arise from lateral septum, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, amygdalohippocampal zone, and ventral subiculum; multineuronal connections come from the basolateral and basomedial amygdaloid nuclei, ventral hippocampus, amygdalopiriform area, as well as lateral entorhinal, perirhinal, and ectorhinal cortices. Most preoptic regions project directly to SCN. Multisynaptic inputs come from the lateral preoptic region. Hypothalamic inputs originate from the anterior, arcuate, dorsal, dorsomedial, lateral, paraventricular, posterior, periventricular posterior, retrochiasmatic, subparaventricular, ventromedial and tuberomammillary nuclei. Paraventricular thalamic nucleus, intergeniculate leaflet and zona incerta directly innervate SCN. Polyneuronal inputs arise from the subparafascicular parvicellular thalamic nucleus. Brainstem afferents originate from the pretectum, superior colliculus, periaqueductal gray matter, parabrachial nucleus, pedunculopontine nucleus, raphe system, locus coeruleus, nucleus incertus and reticular formation. Nucleus tractus solitarius, C3 catecholamine region, rostral ventrolateral medulla and spinal trigeminal nucleus provide indirect inputs. We propose that the SCN receives feedback primarily from interoceptive systems such as the circumventricular, autonomic, and neuroendocrine systems that are important in the central regulation of glucose metabolism (e.g., insulin and glucocorticoids).