A review of methods to monitor the modulation of mRNA stability: a novel approach to drug discovery and therapeutic intervention.
Cheneval D, Kastelic T, Fuerst P, Parker CN
Abstract:
Posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression is an elaborate and intricate process, constituting an important mechanism for the control of protein expression. During its existence, mRNA is escorted by proteins and other RNAs, which control the maturation, transportation, localization, translational efficiency, and ultimately its degradation. Without changes at the transcription level, mRNA steady-state levels can vary dramatically by just small changes in mRNA stability. By influencing the metabolism of specific mRNAs, the abundance of specific mRNAs can be controlled in organisms from bacteria to mammals. In eukaryotic cells, the control of mRNA stability is exerted through specific cis-acting elements (sequence-specific control elements) and trans-acting factors (mRNA binding proteins and some miRNAs). mRNA stability appears to be a key regulator in controlling the expression of many proteins. Dysregulation of mRNA stability has been associated with human diseases, including cancer, inflammatory disease, and Alzheimer's. These observations suggest that modulating the stability of specific mRNAs may represent a viable strategy for pharmaceutical intervention. The literature already describes several compounds that influence mRNA stability. Measuring mRNA stability by conventional methods is labor intensive and time-consuming. However, several systems have been described that can be used to screen for modulators of mRNA levels in a high-throughput format. Thus, these assay systems offer a novel approach for screening targets that at present appear to be poorly "drugable." This review describes the utility of mRNA stability as a novel approach to drug discovery, focusing on assay methods and tool compounds available to monitor mRNA stability. The authors describe mRNA stability assays and issues related to this approach.